all right welcome to part three of
chapter five diffusion in solids
so we've learned about the mechanism of
diffusion
vacancy and interstitial we learned a
little bit about why it's important
and we'll learn a lot more about that as
we get into chapter 10.
and now we'd like to do is discuss how
we can predict the rate of diffusion
all right so the rate of diffusion is
quantified by
fick's first law and this
equation which i don't have on here
quite yet but this is getting close
is found was found experimentally okay
so it's an empirical equation
so first we're going to do is let's just
go ahead and define the
rate of diffusion so the rate of
diffusion is going to be
mass moving through an area
per unit of time so kilograms meters
squared per second
or it might be moles per centimeter
squared per second so
stuff per area per time that's what we
call flux and referred to as j
that's our rate
all right so the basic experiment then
was to
take a thin membrane impose a
concentration
across the membrane and then measure how
fast
molecules atoms move from one side of
the membrane to the other
and what's observed is that the greater
this concentration difference
the faster the flux faster we move
things through
and the greater this separation
delta x the slower
we move things through which hopefully
makes sense right if we make this
twice as thick then we've got twice as
far to move stuff
and ultimately what's important is
actually the gradient here
so it's a delta c delta x or dc dx
so the flux is proportional to
the gradient dc dx and then all we have
to do
is put a proportionality constant in
between these
and we get fixed first law of diffusion
and then d here is referred to as the
diffusion coefficient
and many times you'll hear me refer to
it as the diffusivity
so two names for the diffusion
coefficient
or the diffusivity all right so you
could double check the units here
but d is going to be in something like
uh centimeters squared per second
or meters squared per second c
is a concentration so that's going to be
in like kilograms per
meter cubed right so an amount per
volume and then x of course is in
meters so that'll give you a flux
of kilograms per meter squared per
second
all right in steady state conditions
the concentration gradient here doesn't
change with time
okay and so in steady state conditions
this dc dx
term then just becomes a delta c delta x
so we'll be given the high concentration
and low concentration values
and we'll be given the thickness of a
membrane so we can just calculate this
and then given the diffusivity which
simply depends on the material that
we're
diffusing through we can come up with
the flux
so let's look at a simple example so
here is um say we have a pair of
gloves and we're worried about the
movement of methylene chloride
which is in a paint remover through the
glove
okay if we were to use a butyl rubber
glove which is not a good choice
let's go ahead and take a look at that
though we've got a thickness of the
glove at about 0.04 centimeters
and we'd like to know how much of this
methylene chloride is coming through
okay so here's our picture we have paint
remover
we've got a glove protecting our skin
and we've got our skin now in this glove
just kind of immersed in the paint
thinner
and this is going to be a fix for a
small problem we're going to assume
a linear gradient because the problem is
given to us as a steady state problem
we'll get to non-steady state problems
in a in a bit
so let's say you were to go ahead and
use this for
a few hours let's see what happens with
the amount
of paint of the methylene chloride that
comes through
okay so one of the things has to be
given is a diffusivity so this is the
diffusivity
for methylene chloride through butyl
rubber okay so that's a given or it's in
a table
110 times 10 to the minus eight
centimeters square per second and we're
given the high concentration and low
concentration values
these depend on the environment and
we're given
the fact that the globe thickness is
0.04
so you can see here we're just simply
plugging in and we end up with
about 1 times 10 to the minus 5 grams
per centimeter squared per second
all right let me just say something
about this negative sign here
this negative sign is important and it
refers to the direction of the flux
so when i have a gradient as shown so
this is a negative gradient
right that we're dropping as we move
along in x direction
this is a negative gradient the flux
moves
in this direction it moves in the
positive x direction so that's a
positive flux
so that's where this negative comes from
so i have to be careful when i do my
delta c term here
right that i'm doing c2 minus c1
we're always going to assume that our
x-axis is positive
as it points to the right so if i was to
reverse
this picture put my skin on this side
the paint remover over here
and now my gradient would look like this
which is actually a positive gradient
okay i'd still do c2 minus c1
okay i get a positive number i'd end up
with a negative flux
negative flux meaning that my flux is
now moving to the left
so the so that negative sign is
important you can't just simply get rid
of it
all the time it depends upon your
coordinate system and how you've chosen
to set up your sketch all right but
let's go ahead and look at this answer a
little bit
when it's normalized to an area
it's not clear exactly what this means
so it's considered the glove
if we take a a good you know
medium-sized glove
you can estimate the surface area to be
something like 200 centimeters squared
okay so if we go ahead and plug that in
and then let's say we're
using the paint thinner for three hours
okay so we'll multiply by three hours
we multiplied by 200 centimeters squared
so these units cancel
and we're left with 25 grams which is
quite a bit
all right so next time we're going to do
is look at
the role of temperature or answer how
does diffusion
depend upon temperature